---
title: 12 Rounds
date: 2009-03-29 00:00 UTC

hero_image_description: "A speed bag"
publication: The Jamaica Gleaner
publication_date: 2009-03-29 00:00 UTC

cast:
  - John Cena
  - Aidan Gillen
director: Renny Harlin
running_time_in_minutes: 108
genre: Action
---

There’s not much to say about _12 Rounds_, which claims to be an action thriller
but never gets around to producing any thrills, except for ending after only 108
minutes. John Cena, of American professional wrestling, stars as a beat cop who
arrests a criminal mastermind by chance, and must save his girlfriend when the
same terrorist kidnaps her a year later. The film was produced by WWE Studios,
the movie arm of major wrestling outfit World Wrestling Entertainment, so the
title, apart from referencing a plot point, is a clever way to rope in Cena’s
longtime followers.

It’s hard to imagine anyone other than those followers enjoying _12 Rounds_,
which is as ordinary as a multimillion-dollar movie can get. In 1896, Frenchman
Louis Lumiére set up his camera beside a railroad track. The resulting shot, of
the arrival of a train, was so startling that some viewers screamed or moved
away from the screen as they watched. Today’s moviegoing public is pumped so
full of high-octane footage that we yawn as a fireball rips through an apartment
building or as a luxury car does somersaults on the highway. Flying under an
overpass becomes passé; driving on the sidewalk becomes pedestrian. Movie
studios compensate with bigger explosions and more elaborate chases, seeking to
shock us even as they jade us.

Thus we have films like _12 Rounds_, which zooms from one action sequence to the
next but leaves the plot behind. Cena and Aidan Gillen (HBO’s _The Wire_) have
little to do except play good-cop/bad-guy; there’s no characterization to help
texture their line readings. Without a compelling story or compelling leads, the
promotional materials fall back on credentials — ‘From the director of _Die Hard
2_ and the producer of _Speed_’. To be fair, _12 Rounds_ does borrow from both
films — there is a cop running around trying to save his woman from the hands of
a terrorist, and there is a bomb on a bus.

To be really fair, the film copies elements from every action blockbuster of the
last twenty-five years, from _Commando_ to _The Fast and the Furious_. But we
shouldn’t fault it for failing to live up to its obligations any more than we
should fault ourselves for neglecting ours. John Cena is only the latest in a
century-strong battalion of Aryan supermen projected onto screens around the
world. The United States has a narrow definition of hero, and it looks like
Charlton Heston and Sylvestor Stallone and John Cena. It always has, and for the
foreseeable future it will.

So be it. It is up to us to recognize that America maintains her power most
directly, and with the greatest accuracy, not with smart bombs, but with dull
hits like _12 Rounds_. Because of her relentless propaganda, half our countrymen
and women want to emigrate to Florida; they will be the ones enduring the midday
sun tomorrow outside the American embassy in Liguanea. Standing in the sun,
dreaming about a place only the movies can hallucinate — the land of the
freeze-frame and the home of bravado.

Here’s a suggestion for the next action film you should see: _Arrival of a
Train_ by Louis Lumiére. It’s an oldie but a goodie.
