---
title: "2012"
date: 2009-11-15 00:00 UTC

hero_image_description: "A pair of rubber water boots"
publication: The Jamaica Gleaner
publication_date: 2009-11-15 00:00 UTC
publication_url: http://old.jamaica-gleaner.com/gleaner/20091115/ent/ent10.html

cast:
  - John Cusack
  - Amanda Peet
  - Chiwetel Ejiofor
director: Roland Emmerich
running_time_in_minutes: 158
genre: Action
---

Apparently, if the apocalypse arrives, Amanda Peet will survive. While this is
good news for any warm-blooded male who also survives, it does seem a bit
improbable. However, *2012* establishes early that it isn't overly concerned
with probabilities, including as it does the melting of the Earth's crust, the
reversal of the Earth's polarity and the near-complete annihilation of mankind
by natural forces... three years from now.

Which is kind of liberating. It's one thing to pore over the science fiction of
*Primer* (2004), a time-travel movie whose writer drew from existing academic
work (Google the Meissner Effect or Feynman diagrams). Attention to detail
invites critical scrutiny. Not so in *2012*. When an aircraft carrier, swept
along by a tidal wave, crushes the White House, there's no point in saying,
"Aha! The USS John F Kennedy was decommissioned in 2007 and is in Philadelphia!"
(Although that is true.)

*2012* is more in the spirit of (read: rehashes) popcorn-chompers like
*Independence Day* (1996) and *The Day After Tomorrow* (2004), all three of
which were directed by Roland Emmerich, have date-related titles and feature the
widespread destruction of the United States (respectively by alien invasion, an
instant Ice Age and solar explosions). You know you're in a rut when you're
obliterating the White House for the third time.

Emmerich revels in epic destruction. All three disaster films spend time and
most of their obscene budgets on wide shots of cities in peril. In *2012*, we
see the last of Los Angeles, then Las Vegas, then Washington, then New York.
While this is good news for anyone who dislikes America, it does seem a bit...
oh great, now we're rehashing, too.

You'd think Emmerich, who is German, would be less prone to Hollywood's
narcissistic obsession. A major part of the appeal of *District 9*, this
summer's alien-invasion flick, was that it took place in Johannesburg, South
Africa. Finally, a disaster movie didn't have America at its geological or
ideological epicenter. For Jamaican audiences, a blockbuster full of black
people is way more shocking than an erupting supervolcano.

*2012*, which has both an erupting supervolcano and black people, adheres to
Hollywood's unofficial miscegenation laws. Thus Amanda Peet and John Cusack
(both Caucasian) fall in love, as do Thandie Newton and Chiwetel Ejiofor (both
Negroid). Any other combination, the thinking goes, and American audiences would
really think the world was coming to an end. (And if the word 'Negroid' bothers
you, stop giving money to filmmakers who perpetuate its necessity.)

If you can ignore the loopy plot, the sense of deja vu, the American bias and
the romantic segregation, *2012* is fun to sit through. For the first hour.
Maybe you'll last through the second. But once it enters hour number three, you
just want everyone to hurry up and die. (Except Amanda Peet.) With most of
humanity lost, Emmerich can't readily make a sequel to *2012*. While this is
good news for everyone, it does seem a bit... oh, never mind.
