---
title: Caramel
date: 2008-04-10 00:00 UTC
published: false

cast:
  - Nadine Labaki
  - Yasmine Elmasri
  - Joanna Moukarzel
  - Giséle Aouad
director: Nadine Labaki
running_time_in_minutes: 95
genre: Comedy, Drama
---

As a man, I don’t get invited to many bridal showers, baby showers or restaurant
restrooms (although I have a fair idea what the last looks like). The secrets of
these provinces are guarded by their occupants, instinctively and collectively,
as subversive intervention into a world built, shaped and dominated by men.
Naturally, we power-hungry men are a little curious. How can a bridal shower
last five hours? At a baby shower, do you talk about the father? What are you
doing when you say you’re powdering your nose?

So watching _Caramel_, the filmic debut of Lebanese writer, director and star
Nadine Labaki, at least for male viewers, is a lot like peeking through the
crack in the wall of the girls’ bathroom in high school, except the girls are
older, sexier, more complicated, and you don’t have to worry about getting
caught. The film is set in a Beirut hairdressing salon, revolving around the
intertwined lives of four women: Layale (Labaki), in love with a married man;
Nisrine (Yasmine Elmasri), soon-to-be-married; Rima (Joanna Moukarzel), rebel
with a coif; and Jamale (Giséle Aouad), struggling actress.

The salon, Sibelle, is workplace and home away from home for the women. For
Layale, manicures and pedicures sometimes take a backseat in favour of meeting
her illicit paramour (whose face we never see) in the front seat of her
not-so-dependable sedan. Rima washes hair in the back room, and the privacy
(often unintentionally heightened by sudden blackouts) leads to a more intimate
transaction with a beautiful customer. As anyone who has been in a salon knows,
professional stylists can elicit confessionals and apply conditioner at the same
time; drying chairs become hot-headed personal shrinks.

The pace is at once hurried and relaxed — appointments and traffic interrupt
gossip and grooming; the real world, with all its attendant annoyances, insists
on intruding into the quiet warmth of the parlour (the real Beirut also has a
chronic noise pollution problem). At one point, Layale throws her lover’s wallet
into a drawer, as if she can tuck her whole messy, imperfect love life away with
it. The girls spontaneously celebrate Nisrine’s upcoming wedding with dancing
and singing and an aluminum-foil wreath Rima throws on Nisrine’s head.

The first half of _Caramel_ is a traditional comedy, although a playful and
sophisticated one — the sticky-sweet confection of the title is an epilation
tool suitable for Hezbollah; more than once, Layale finds catharsis as her
customers flinch. The supporting cast (Sihame Haddad as an old seamstress, Adel
Karam as a policeman enamored with Layale) is talented and hilarious, the
highlight being Aziza Semaan’s priceless portrayal of an elderly, senile bag
lady still looking for love. It is only in the second half of this 95-minute
picture that Labaki pulls out the bobby pins, allowing the dramatic events to
cascade. As the four women see their dreams fading, they each try — and fail –
to invent individual solutions. After a depressed Layale calls from a cheap
motel room, the women finally share, laugh and cry together. It’s impossible to
resist laughing and crying with them.

_Caramel_ premiered almost a year ago at the Cannes Film Festival, won
international acclaim, and has been slowly making its way around the world (next
stop: Britain on May 16). Most of the praise lavished on the film has focused on
the absence of any political content, a Lebanese film not about war and
conflict. I think that such kudos miss the point. Right after the final shot
cuts to black, Labaki prints: “To my Beirut.” This film, sugary on the surface,
is deeply political. The problems the women face stem directly and inexorably
from the constrained, confined social and economic space they are forced to
inhabit in a highly patriarchal and militarized society (fair warning: PLOT
SPOILERS AHEAD).

Layale is a lady leper — no longer a virgin, she is considered damaged goods by
bachelors. Her subsequent pursuit of a married man therefore denies easy
dismissal as reprehensible or naïve or selfish; from a practical perspective, it
is her best shot at happiness. Nisrine faces a similar problem with more
catastrophic potential. Also sexually experienced, she must find a way to
deceive her husband on her honeymoon or risk losing a life partner, shaming her
family and becoming Layale. The lesser of two evils is to become a virgin again,
a cosmetic surgical procedure blessedly but gut-wrenchingly depicted with the
film’s match cut to the seamstress’s sowing machine.

Rami’s nascent lesbianism is possibly more dangerous to the carefully
constructed social fabric of heterosexual union — she must settle for soothing
scalps in the back of a salon, in the process sacrificing personal happiness,
the joy of intimate and open relationships, and the self-confidence that comes
with displaying to the world who you are. Jamale also sacrifices her womanly
confidence in the hyper-sexualized, unapologetically discriminating world of
commercial television. In one arresting audition scene, as the camera jerks ever
closer, Jamale recites banal ad copy for a toothpaste, almost breaking down as
the casting agent imperiously issues instructions and destructive criticism.

What Labaki has accomplished is not a Lebanese film without conflict or
politics. It is a film laced with politics, damning at its core the covert
gender-based oppression of its protagonists while still retaining a magnificent
and magnanimous humanity. It is a rare filmmaker who can rebuke without
condescension, who can provoke without pity. _Caramel_ is that most delicious of
cinematic treats: a devotion picture.
