---
title: City of Men
date: 2008-04-06 00:00 UTC
published: false

cast:
  - Douglas Silva
  - Darlan Cunha
director: Paulo Morelli
running_time_in_minutes: 110
genre: Drama
---

When I saw Fernando Meirelles’s *Cidade de Deus* in 2002, I was affected by the
unvarnished and honest depiction of the Brazilian favelas — shanty towns,
crowded onto Rio de Janiero’s hillsides, filled with poverty and perishable
dreams. Although I had never been to Brazil, the violence and vitriol reminded
me of the Jamaican inner city communities I had grown up watching on the news
and whose gunshots echoed faintly in my guarded suburb. Meirelles’s relentlessly
kinetic camera captured the vitality and futility of life in the favela, two
sides of a tarnished centavo.

So I entered the theatre to see Paulo Morelli’s *Cidade dos Homens*, “from the
producers of *City of God*,” with unhealthy skepticism (especially for a
critic). I was prepared, at the first copycat edit or borrowed line of dialogue,
to dismiss the film as a failed attempt to cash in on the runaway success of the
2002 original. Two hours later, I was still waiting. *City of Men* is as
powerful, and more touching, than its filmic predecessor.

In a way, *City of Men* actually predates *City of God*. Or perhaps a better way
to say it is that the two films are blood brothers, much like *City of Men*’s
dual protagonists. Writer Paulo Lins, who grew up in Cidade de Deus, published
an eponymous 1997 novel chronicling four decades of death and decadence and
tracing the divergent path of two childhood friends. Fernando Meirelles then
turned one of the novel’s vignettes into the short film *Palace II* (2000), with
12-year-olds Darlan Cunha as Acerola and Douglas Silva as Laranjinha.

Two years later, Meirelles made *Cidade de Deus* and the film’s success led to
the Brazilian television series *Cidade dos Homens*, starring Cunha and Silva in
switched roles. The show became a hit in its own right, its twenty episodes
playing to 35 million viewers, and went off the air in 2005. *Cidade dos Homens* –
the film — picks up three years after the end of the television series. It’s a
history as complicated as those of the favelas.

In the film, Acerola (Silva) and Laranjinha (Cunha), are grappling with the
uncomfortable transition from boys to men as they turn 18 — Acerola has a wife
and a young child; Laranjinha wants to find the father he never knew. They live
on Dead End Hill, under the armed protection of Madrugadao and his number two,
Nefasto. The film opens on a blistering summer day. Madrugadao descends the hill
for the first time in three years to go for an ocean swim. It is the pebble that
catalyzes a landslide of gang warfare, defections, mistaken alliances, ambushes
and dead bodies.

While the quicksilver atmosphere of living in Dead End Hill is terrifying, both
for the occupants and the audience — in one sequence where Acerola flees for his
life through the arteries of the hill, I wanted to scream at him to shed his
backpack and ten pounds — the heart of the film is the relationship between
Acerola and Laranjinha. Theirs is a truly familial bond — each understands the
other better than he understands himself. When Laranjinha refuses to enter a
building that may house his father, Acerola goes by himself. Laranjinha kisses
Acerola’s child as if it is his own.

Cunha and Silva play the inseparable friends so naturalistically, so easily,
that a willing suspension of disbelief isn’t necessary, only a belief in
suspense — What will they do now? Where will they sleep? Will Laranjinha find
Acerola? Will Acerola become like all the other boys? The relationship is
enhanced through flashbacks stripped from the television series — we get to see
Cunha and Silva as their muscles emerge, as their smiles get less toothy, as
they grow up. The effect is not unlike watching home movie footage, an effect
enhanced by the contrast between the TV show’s grainier 16mm and the film’s more
polished 35mm images. Morelli desaturates the flashback clips, but the rich,
colourful performances are undiminished by aesthetic tricks. The director knows
that his actors have embodied their characters for years; he moves the camera so
close to their faces that a tightening of the jaw or a relaxing of the eyes says
more than a monologue. At the film’s climax, as Laranjinha pleads with Acerola,
we are focused not on the words but on their faces.

The handheld camerawork is mostly out of necessity — you try laying camera track
on narrow, winding, broken concrete steps between zinc fences — but Morelli and
his cinematographer, Adriano Goldman, resist swinging the camera around. The
chases and fights feel claustrophobic and desperate even with a Steadicam. In
fact, you wonder how long James Bond and Jason Bourne would last in Morelli’s
world without editing to save them.

As visceral and cathartic as the film was for this Third World critic, I can’t
escape a sense of closure, not just for Acerola and Laranjinha, but for the
cinematic depiction of poor, gun-ravaged urban Rio. One novel, two feature films
and a television series are not nearly enough to tell all the stories that need
to be told, but new stylistic and narrative exploration is necessary if Morelli
et al want us to return to the theatre. The next one-sheet I see for a Brazilian
film should say “Not from the producers of *City of Men*, but just as
compelling.” But that’s no way to win hearts, minds and the box office. *Cidade
dos Angels*, anyone?
