---
title: Duplicity
date: 2009-05-04 00:00 UTC

hero_image_description: "Panels from a Spy vs Spy comic from MAD magazine"
publication: The Jamaica Gleaner
publication_date: 2009-05-04 00:00 UTC
publication_url: http://old.jamaica-gleaner.com/gleaner/20090504/ent/ent2.html

cast:
  - Clive Owen
  - Julia Roberts
director: Tony Gilroy
running_time_in_minutes: 125
genre: Romantic comedy
---

‘The greatest thing you’ll ever learn/Is just to love and be loved in return.’
Those are the last lyrics of ‘Nature Boy’, a timeless song about human nature,
made famous sixty years ago by the equally timeless Nat King Cole. So simple to
say — or for Nat, to sing — yet so difficult to do. Forget government bonds and
collateralized debt obligations — the largest investment you can make in life is
to love someone. And as the world’s stockbrokers now know all too well, without
trust, your investment isn’t worth very much.

Trust is what makes relationships work, and doubt and suspicion are what kills
them. Writer/director Tony Gilroy knows this, as does anyone who’s ever loved
and lost. In his new movie, *Duplicity*, he takes the issue of trust to its
logical extreme, turning his lovebirds into actual spies, engaged in real
subterfuge, guessing and second-guessing, crossing and double-crossing, too
scared to commit until they know the other person won’t hurt them.

This is the man who penned three Jason Bourne film adaptations and pulled double
duty on the sly thriller Michael Clayton, which means: a) he knows a thing or
two about movie spies; b) he likes writing for Hollywood’s leading men; and c)
expect complications. *Duplicity* gives us not Matt Damon, not George Clooney,
but Clive Owen as star hunk, and Julia Roberts for him to chase. Owen is Ray
Koval, formerly of British intelligence, and Roberts is Claire Stenwick,
formerly of American intelligence. If the set-up and the names sound like
something out of a Raymond Chandler novel, it’s because Gilroy is
head-over-heels in love with the pictures Hollywood used to make sixty years ago
(back when Nat was king).

Chandler’s most famous character, hard-boiled detective Philip Marlowe, was
played most famously by Humphrey Bogart in *The Big Sleep* (1946). Bogart owns
the screen, slouching around in tailored suits and cigarette smoke, and the
camera lingers on his face as much as on his very young, soon-to-be very famous
costar, Lauren Bacall. Like *Duplicity*, the dialogue is honed and shorn to
fine-edged perfection; the characters fall in love by trading barbs.

*Duplicity* is set in New York (along with Dubai, London, Miami and Rome), the
world capital for the world’s capital, which is why our spies are there — they
are working for warring conglomerates. The second time we see Clive Owen, he is
striding down a Manhattan sidewalk, and he fits the city like a comfortable
leather shoe. He brings to mind that other suave, cinematic Brit who made New
York his onscreen own — Cary Grant. Both men seem made for their bespoke gray
suits, instead of the other way round. They belong to us, larger-than-life,
every man’s exemplar, every woman’s dream.

Even Claire Stenwick’s name is homage to a Golden Age star, Barbara Stanwyck.
She was one of the first _femmes_ to be _fatale_, in movies like *Double
Indemnity* (1944). Julia Roberts doesn’t duplicate Stanwyck’s cocktail of sin
and seduction, but she’s still a tall drink of water. Like Lauren Bacall,
Barbara Stanwyck, Grace Kelly, or any of the enduring, luminescent American
actresses, Julia Roberts is irresistible, whether wrapped in bed sheets or
strutting across an Italian courtyard.

Ultimately, *Duplicity* is a love story enthralled by love stories, a romance
written by a hopeless romantic, who longs for a time when the movie never ended,
when you couldn’t tell where the character stopped and the movie star began,
where you could trick yourself into believing you were really watching Clive
Owen and Julia Roberts fall in love. Duplicitous? Definitely. But in the end, so
worth it. Just like, well, just like Nat used to sing — ‘Then I could say,
“Baby, baby, I love you”/Just like those guys in moving pictures all do.’
