---
title: Gran Torino
date: 2009-03-22 00:00 UTC

hero_image_description: "A Matchbox model of a muscle car"
publication: The Jamaica Gleaner
publication_date: 2009-03-22 00:00 UTC

cast:
  - Clint Eastwood
  - Bee Vang
  - Ahney Her
director: Clint Eastwood
running_time_in_minutes: 116
genre: Drama
---

The Gran Torino was an American sports car manufactured by Ford between 1972 and
1976, a long, low, wide vehicle with an aggressive grille and a large engine. It
was a man’s man’s car — handsome without being conspicuous, powerful without
being ostentatious. There was a gruffness about it, with a name that came from
the Italian city equivalent to Detroit — Turin, or as the locals said, Torino.
Today, the Gran Torino is a collector’s item, a relic, a well-crafted reminder
of long-gone American automotive dominance.

Clint Eastwood, who you may have heard of, is an American actor who started out
in the television western *Rawhide* exactly 50 years ago. He made his first
fistful of dollars in a trilogy of Italian westerns portraying men with fast
hands and few words. But his widest popularity came between 1971 and 1976, when
he appeared in three films as Dirty Harry, a tough-and-ready cop with an
aggressive streak and a large gun. He was the quintessential man’s man —
strong-jawed but clean-shaven, with just enough wrinkles left in his suit and
etched in his face. Today, he is a celebrated director, too old for action, a
well-respected remainder of rapidly-diminishing American cultural dominance.

The comparison is invited because Eastwood’s new film, which feels for all the
world like his last in front of the camera, is called *Gran Torino*. In it, the
aged star is Walt Kowalski, a widower, a war veteran, and a psychologically
wounded man. His two sons and their families have forgotten him, or try to
forget him, or try to put him somewhere where they will be able to forget him.
His combat duty was in Korea, the forgotten war, lost between the twin towers of
World War II and Vietnam, although Walt is haunted by the atrocities he
committed. He is bitter, scathing, deeply racist and desperately lonely. His
only comforts are his dog and his mint-condition Gran Torino, which he helped
make during his years at a Ford plant.

Oh, one last thing. He lives on a street filled with second-generation Hmong
immigrants from Southeast Asia.

What follows is both simple and complicated. It is yet another retread of white
guilt: Walt, and Eastwood, standing in for middle-class middle America, must
come to terms with past and current sins of prejudice and discrimination. In the
fifties, Hollywood made what are known as *problem pictures*, which dealt with
“the Negro problem”. *Gran Torino*, on one level, is just an updated problem
picture, with ethnic substitution.

But after a half-century in the business, Clint Eastwood knows how to make a
movie. And he is still a captivating screen presence, even though his smooth
voice is almost vanished. Through his performance and his camera, we see an
unflinching portrait of a man trying to make the right choices with the wrong
tools. It is hard not to view Kowalski as the logical extension of Harry
Callahan, as a commentary on the costs of false invincibility and stubborn
self-reliance.

Eastwood has stripped his screen persona to its core — once again, with few
words to say, but without any weapons to hold, in hands that have lost their
dexterity and speed. What is left is a journey that stretches from the past to
the present, from Korea to Michigan, from *Rawhide* to *Unforgiven*, a journey
that ends in *Gran Torino*. Go take it for a spin.
