---
title: Married Life
date: 2008-05-01 00:00 UTC
published: false

cast:
  - Chris Cooper
  - Patricia Clarkson
  - Rachel McAdams
  - Pierce Brosnan
director: Ira Sachs
running_time_in_minutes: 90
genre: Drama
---

Harry Allen is married. Happily married. To his wife, Pat Allen. They live
together, in the way married couples do — Harry goes to work in a suit and tie;
Pat stays home and does the laundry; he has a drink in the evenings while she
makes dinner. Harry is bored with work. Pat is bored with the house. Their life
is full of boring routine. So eventually they get bored with each other. Then
Harry meets Kay.

Thus begins _Married Life_, a 90-minute romp through 1940s suburbia, before
suburbia became known as suburbia. If it all sounds a bit romantic and
patriarchal, don’t worry: it’s all in good fun, and the writer and director, Ira
Sachs, knows what he’s doing. Before long, the house that Harry built gets a
knock from a big bad wolf — Harry’s best friend, Richard Langley.

The film explores the relationships before, during and after marriage between
Harry (played by the unfailingly flawless Chris Cooper), Pat (Patricia Clarkson
with a twinkle in her eye), Richard (Pierce Brosnan, more on him later) and Kay
(Rachel McAdams, duly gorgeous). Unable to stomach the idea of Pat’s loneliness
if he left her for Kay, Harry soon realizes there’s only one way to happiness:
he must kill his wife. Meanwhile Richard, dog that he is, decides to chase
Harry’s lover, Kay. The boys aren’t the only sneaky ones. Pat has secrets of her
own and Kay, the most luscious young widow since Anna Nicole Smith (oh, wait,
that won’t happen for another 60 years), can’t decide what she wants.

Somewhere between Kay’s initial entrance — with her coiffed blonde curls and
emerald green satin dress — and Harry’s decision to poison Pat’s indigestion
medicine — courtesy of darkroom chemicals from the friendly neighbourhood
pharmacy — it becomes clear that _Married Life_ is a feature-length love note to
the screwball comedies of its period.

All throughout the forties, Hollywood experienced a comedic renaissance as it
realized its potential as a jointly visual and auditory medium. Writers,
imported _en masse_ from Broadway in the thirties, settled into their new
playground, and the silent antics of Chaplin and Keaton were superceded by the
frenetic witticisms delivered by Cary Grant and James Stewart and Katherine
Hepburn. Many of the best films of the period were comedies of remarriage — an
unhappy couple divorce, flirt with outsiders and then remarry — because the
Production Code in effect at the time banned the depiction of extramarital
affairs. _Married Life_ is the Screwball Comedy That Never Was; unbound by a
pesky Production Code, affairs come out of the woodwork of Harry and Pat’s
weekend cottage.

Patricia Clarkson and Rachel McAdams split Hepburn’s prodigious talents —
Clarkson possesses the same exquisite comic timing and effortless grace while
McAdams inherits Hepburn’s angular beauty and _haute couture_ imperiousness. One
of the film’s many tongue-in-cheek jokes is that McAdams’s Kay, with her
Barbie-doll proportions and mischievous mouth, lives alone and chaste in a
suburban house (her favourite leisure activity is reading, for chrissakes).

Chris Cooper plays the sort of upper-middle-class everyman that James Stewart
became famous portraying in films like _Mr Smith Goes to Washington_ and _It’s a
Wonderful Life_. Cooper plays Harry as a man who is both meticulous and nervous,
both long-suffering and short-sighted. He’s a wonderful naïf.

And if ever a man was meant to slip into Cary Grant’s loafers, it’s Pierce
Brosnan. As the suave, debonair Richard Langley, he simply runs away with the
picture. I’ve had a schoolboy crush on Brosnan ever since I saw him in 1995’s
_Goldeneye_ as suave, debonair James Bond. As his boyish good looks matured —
gray hairs creeping around his temples, his cheeks and chest filling out — my
infatuation matured correspondingly into a leisurely long-lasting love. I
enjoyed him as the suave, debonair Thomas Crown in _The Thomas Crown Affair,_
and as the suave, debonair (and unstable) Julian Noble in _The Matador_. Sure,
he hasn’t displayed the greatest range in his career. Neither did Grant. But
when these guys don a fedora, no one, on screen or off, can resist.

The film’s opening credit sequence is a joy in and of itself, as oil paintings
of high heels and floral bedsheets come to life while Doris Day scats through “I
Can’t Give You Anything But Love”. It establishes the deadly serious frivolity
embodied in the actors’ performances and in the sets and costumes seemingly
pulled intact from the Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer vault. Gwendolyn Margetson’s art
direction is a playful mix of Art Deco extravagance and suburban utilitarianism.
Michael Dennison’s costumes are classic studio-era, and like the classics, he
distinguishes his characters with clever separation of style and colour —
Brosnan’s jackets and vests are cut closer than Cooper’s; McAdams gets the
Technicolor brights and Clarkson the pastel housepaint tones.

Yes, it’s a Hollywood movie made by a guy who loves old Hollywood movies, so of
course it ends well. The boys get the girls. Which boy, which girl? I can keep a
secret as well as the next guy.
