---
title: Soul Men
date: 2009-01-23 00:00 UTC

hero_image_description: "Two black men standing side-by-side in formal suits"
publication: The Jamaica Gleaner
publication_date: 2009-01-23 00:00 UTC
publication_url: http://old.jamaicagleaner.com/gleaner/20090123/ent/ent2.html

cast:
  - Samuel L Jackson
  - Bernie Mac
director: Malcolm Lee
running_time_in_minutes: 103
genre: Comedy
---

*Soul Men* is the story of washed-up, estranged bandmates Floyd Henderson
(Bernie Mac) and Louis Hinds (Samuel L Jackson) as they journey across the
United States, into the past, and through each other, to play a comeback
performance at the Apollo Theater in Harlem, New York.

Directed by Malcolm Lee, cousin to the African American auteur Spike Lee (*Do
the Right Thing, Bamboozled*), the film shows us the unforgiving side of fame,
when the music, money and media attention have disappeared, leaving Henderson
and Hinds aimless and penniless.

Henderson talks Hinds into their first joint appearance in thirty years, setting
the stage for one episodic misadventure after another, including one-night
stands, confusion over paternity, and a night in the slammer.

Longtime writing partners Robert Ramsey and Matthew Stone are adept at the
sniping banter that passes for male bonding between the two musicians. But where
the script should have moved beyond cheap shots and cheaper motel rooms, the
scribes substitute profanity for profundity.

Director Lee’s pedigree stands in contrast to his résumé. *Soul Men* joins
previous work *Undercover Brother* (2002) and *Roll Bounce* (2005) in the
uncomfortable space between parody and stereotype. Lee is unsure of his
audience, and the result panders to black and white alike. His contemporary,
Tyler Perry, hews to safer themes of family, community and religious unity.

Jackson is merely adequate as has-been backup singer Hinds; his characterization
is a collection of scowls and squints. Sharon Leal is better as the vocal
ingénue the duo discover on the road.

Bernie Mac’s bumbling, blustering, bug-eyed buffoon, while mildly entertaining,
calls forth the forgotten films of the 1930s and 40s. Mantan Moreland, Willie
Best, Clarence Muse and many talented others built careers playing the only
roles available to them—bumbling, blustering, bug-eyed buffoons, or as they were
known then, coons.

The coon archetype was born even earlier, in 19th-century minstrel shows, where
white actors in blackface lampooned African American life for their own
amusement. It has endured, kept alive by actors of colour torn between pride and
paychecks, between a principle and a principal, a never-ending line of
sycophantic, shining, smiling faces from Bill Robinson to Bill Cosby, from Eddie
Anderson to Eddie Murphy.

It is unfortunate that Mac should have *Soul Men* as his coda; his film and
television work showed a man rapidly mastering his craft. His social commentary
was sharp, but accessible; his humour broad, but biting. His eponymous sitcom,
*The Bernie Mac Show*, skewered African American family life for the generation
born during *The Cosby Show*.

*Soul Men* reaches for a bit of history itself—Hinds and Henderson’s comeback
performance is a tribute to the deceased third member of their fictional group
The Real Deal, Marcus Hooks, played by real-life soul superstar John Legend.
Soul legend Isaac Hayes also makes an appearance. It seems that Lee and company
understand that while fame and fortune fade, true talent stands the test of
time.
