---
title: Starting Out in the Evening
date: 2008-03-20 00:00 UTC
published: false

cast:
  - Frank Langella
  - Lauren Ambrose
  - Lili Taylor
  - Adrian Lester
director: Andrew Wagner
running_time_in_minutes: 111
genre: Drama
---

Making art about art, a vaguely incestuous and yet high-minded endeavour, can
result in the cultural equivalent of English royalty: an overburdened and
pretentious product coated with grandeur but ultimately quite dull. That
*Starting Out in the Evening*, a film which references Faulkner, Hemingway and
Narayan, escapes such dreary elitism is due equally to Frank Langella’s
exquisite performance and the writing of Fred Parnes and Andrew Wagner (who also
directed).

Langella plays Leonard Schiller, an esteemed but forgotten American novelist
(all four of his books are long out of print) desperate to eke out one final
opus. He spends his days ensconced in his Upper West Side apartment, pecking
fruitlessly at his manual typewriter. His dutiful daughter Ariel (Lili Taylor)
is his cook, companion and only visitor. That is, until change arrives as
Heather Wolfe (Lauren Ambrose), a bright and bright-eyed graduate student who
wants to write her thesis on Schiller, cementing him in the pantheon of Great
American Writers and introducing him to a new generation. Resigned to being a
recluse and dogmatic about his routine, Leonard declines the offer. After facing
rejection from publishers, however, he reconsiders, and the two embark on a
painful path of introspection, loss and the possibility of a May/December
romance.

Langella embodies the enigmatic, elegiac Schiller with such conviction and
compassion that Wagner is often reduced to a technician, required only to point
the camera in his direction. The actor shapes his silences with as much care as
his lines, evoking stubbornness, empathy, desire and affront with the subtlest
shading of his eyes. Etched in his lined face and pale skin are the years of
interminable loneliness brought on by the death of his wife. A muted intensity
seeps through the crusty façade he presents to Heather, an intensity which
deepens her attraction to him, academically and otherwise. Langella utilizes a
reduced palette of acting tropes, which, far from limiting the portrayal, seem
to liberate him in a manner similar to the exuberant minimalist paintings of
Gerhard Richter and Frank Stella.

Lauren Ambrose (a Six Feet Under alum) as Heather fails to impress, capturing
the drive and naivete of a postgraduate but never digging deep enough to find
the connection between her ingénue and Langella’s genius. Extra credit to Wagner
and the casting director for embracing a romantic lead with a healthy figure and
unconventional beauty. Lili Taylor is phenomenal as Schiller’s daughter, a woman
perennially adrift, steaming towards forty without a partner or a child and in
desperate need of both. Her lithe physicality and angular face toy with shadow
and light; she has that indefinable quality, like Diane Lane and Maria Bello,
that compels us to watch her whenever she is onscreen and to search for her when
she is not. Also of note is Adrian Lester (of AMC’s *Hu$tle*) as Ariel’s
on-again, off-again, on-again love interest. Their tender, complicated
relationship is one of the best parts of this well-written film (more extra
credit for presenting an interracial couple as normalized and part of the
reality of present-day America).

Despite the acting and directorial talent, this film, explicitly about writing,
would have failed without the smart, self-aware, simply charming script by
Parnes and Wagner. Given the inherently uncinematic nature of the craft, very
little writing takes place in front of the camera, even though two of the four
main characters spend most of their time doing it. To compensate, Parnes imbues
the entire script with a lingering, meditative quality, where conflicts are more
often postponed than resolved, characters are more likely to bear the brunt of
their sins than blame others, and dialogue interrupts silence rather than the
other way around.

Wagner does his part by setting up static shots, or else slow, languorous
tracking shots, or else handheld shots refreshingly calm and measured (and none
of the trendy frenzy of Paul Greengrass et al). Shot entirely on location in New
York City, the film feels decidedly urban and sophisticated, yet its four-person
microcosm of raw human emotion grounds the film in universal reality. The
relentless drumbeat of traditional Hollywood dramas, inexorably pushing the
story forward and escalating the conflict, would have sliced this film to about
half its 111 minutes, effectively preventing it from being made at all. The
added breathing room of an indie film is here vitally utilized, extending scenes
past their traditional breakpoints to provide poignant and honest moments.

The film ends where it began: with Leonard at his typewriter, staring into the
middle distance. And, as with all good art about art, the theme is not a trumpet
note blared across the house speakers but a soft melody that may exist only
inside your head. *Starting Out in the Evening* does not insist that art is
easy, or that it is devilishly difficult, or that it is the province of a gifted
few, although it does say these things. It suggests that the true essence of art
is lived experience, that in our triumphs and tragedies, our most private
suffering and personal ecstasies, we are each great artists, with some good work
already behind us and with a nagging desire to eke out just one more opus – a
novel, an improbable romance, a commitment, a child. Art is not great because
New York critics lauded it fifty years ago; it is great because the artist knows
that it is honest, it is true, and it is grounded in reality. *Starting Out in
the Evening* is honest, true and grounded in reality, and therefore it is art.
