---
title: The Counterfeiters
date: 2008-04-30 00:00 UTC
published: false

cast:
  - Karl Marcovics
  - Devid Striesow
  - August Diehl
  - Marie Bäumer
director: Stefan Ruzowitsky
running_time_in_minutes: 98
genre: Drama, War
---

What can you buy with a hundred dollars? Today, a Broadway ticket. In 1977, a
barrel of crude oil. In 1954, an ounce of gold. And in 1936, in Germany, for
Jewish forger Salomon Sorowitsch, incarcerated in the Sachsenhausen
concentration camp, a hundred American dollars bought the lives of five men.

At least, that’s how the story goes according to writer/director Stefan
Ruzowitsky in his bleak film *Die Fälscher*, or *The Counterfeiters*.
Sorowitsch, played by a gaunt Karl Marcovics with machined precision, is tasked
by his Nazi captors to do the impossible: forge the British pound, and then the
American dollar, with such perfection so as to fool the Bank of England and the
Federal Reserve Bank. It’s a mission which tears Sorowitsch in half — his
politics, condition and compatriots say no, but as the most notorious
counterfeiter in all Germany (and arguably all Europe), capable of false
identity papers, forged passports and fake Reichsmark, his profession and pride
say yes.

The first section of *Counterfeiters* depicts Sorowitsch’s previous life — the
gambling, the women, the general debauched habits of a man who literally makes
his money. He invites an attractive woman back to his apartment and workshop,
which is where and how the Gestapo find him the following morning. His Grimm
fairy-tale existence quickly becomes the much grimmer reality of the
concentration camp at Sachsenhausen.

The rest of *Counterfeiters* depicts the day-to-day survival of Sorowitsch and
his friends inside the camp (think *Saving Private Ryan* without any salvation
or privacy). It is a miserable, degrading existence where ordinary men,
traumatized beyond repair by having their wives and children ripped from their
hands, try to kill themselves faster than the concentration camp itself. Men who
fall ill are shot by the SS to prevent other prisoners from becoming infected –
in this place, the common cold is a deadly disease. Supplies are short
everywhere; the medic has no medicine. As the film trickles along, we realize
the scarcity is not merely Nazi savagery. The Germans are bankrupt.

Hence Sorowitsch’s predicament. He can do the right thing by his country and
conscience, pass up the chance of a lifetime and be summarily executed, or he
can have his crowning achievement, save himself and his friends, and directly
fund the Nazi war machine. He chooses to stay alive, which is easier said than
done. The Germans are on shrinking deadlines as the Allies make headway on both
fronts. Sorowitsch tries to neither have his cake nor eat it: he tolerates
mistakes and mischief to delay the counterfeiting effort, doing his best not to
help the Germans while being forced to help them. This only provokes their
wrath, and *Counterfeiters* pulls no punches — we have the benefit of history
and hindsight; we see and hear everything.

It is powerful moviemaking. The Jewish prisoners, drained of the will to enjoy
life, to wake up each morning, to live, seem to have their energy echoed in the
desaturated footage — the film is all blues and grays, as if the very celluloid
has bled in commiseration with its subjects. The camera is stable when outside
the camp and when focused on the Germans; shaky when with the Jews. Sergio Leone
was noted for creating landscapes not only out of the Italian countryside, but
of his actors; through his lens, a man’s face became pockmarked knolls of muscle
stretched over bone. Ruzowitsky, or at least his cinematographer Benedict
Neuenfels, creates a similar effect with Marcovics — his cheeks sunken, tiny
valleys between zygomatic and mandible, his eye sockets small dark pools, his
nose a misshapen mesa.

At the same time, I’m not sure what *The Counterfeiters* seeks to add to the
long, decorated list of Nazi-exposé films. The Holocaust motion picture is by
now its own war movie subgenre, with over 100 narrative films (and over 100
documentaries) stretching from *Stalag 17* (1953) and the Czech classic *The
Shop on Main Street* (1965) to *Sophie’s Choice* (1982) and Steven Spielberg’s
pet project and magnus opus, *Schindler’s List* (1993). I will never erase the
image of Ralph Fiennes as Amon Göth using labouring Jews as target practice from
his balcony. At some point, through one film or another, or even through a
different medium, the horror of the Holocaust has hit home for most of us alive
today. We know the Nazi genocidal project was one of the great modern tragedies –
Aristotle, father of drama, would be shaken to his core.

Tragedy, according to the great Greek, is the imitation of an action that is
serious, complete, and of a certain magnitude. But we’ve been there time and
time again with World War II Germany. Aristotle failed to weigh in on an
imitation of the imitations of an action, which is ultimately what *The
Counterfeiters* is. It’s a very close forgery of the Nazi movie we’ve all seen
before, so well-designed a forgery that we’re fooled into selling ourselves
short.
