---
title: The Band's Visit
date: 2008-03-23 00:00 UTC
published: false

cast:
  - Sasson Gabai
  - Ronit Elkabetz
  - Saleh Bakri
  - Khalifa Natour
director: Eran Kolirin
running_time_in_minutes: 89
genre: Comedy, Drama
---

Godard famously said cinema is truth at 24 frames per second; Michael Haneke
(director of the wickedly playful *Funny Games* in theatres now) says a feature
film is 24 lies per second; Eran Kolirin, the Israeli writer and director of
*The Band’s Visit*, hasn’t put forth his own version of Godard, but I’ll do it
for him – motion pictures are emotion, 24 frames per second. Insofar as cinema
can encapsulate and embody emotion — extracting it from actors, distilling it
through cinematography, preserving it through editing, and serving it up on a
flickering, fleeting tray — then *The Band’s Visit* does not just hint at
longing, suggest longing, or effuse longing: it is longing.

Eight Egyptian policemen, the Alexandria Ceremonial Police Orchestra, arrive in
Israel to perform at the inauguration of an Arab culture center.
Miscommunication between the young trumpet player, Haled (Saleh Bakri), and a
cute airport information desk attendant lands the band in the wrong town, a town
small enough to have one bus stop and one bus trip per day. It also has Ronit
Elkabetz as Dina, the owner of a small restaurant. The band leader,
Lieutenant-Colonel Tawfiq Zacharya (Sasson Gabai), is thus compelled to accept
Dina’s offer to put the band up for the night.

If this were an American film, a freight train of unstoppable hilarity would
ensue involving rabbis, mistaken identities, a camel and the business end of a
tuba. Instead, Kolirin takes us deeply, sharply, painfully close to his
characters — reckless Haled, trapped Dina, repressed Tawfiq, and his lonely
second-in-command Simon (Khalifa Natour) — and stays there for 89 minutes. It
doesn’t feel short. And it doesn’t sell us short, either; part of the joy of
watching *The Band’s Visit* is acknowledging Kolirin’s implicit trust that we
will go for a ride without popcorn moments or expensive thrills.

Shai Goldman’s cinematography tells the story, wordlessly, in plaintive, static
shots of the dusty half-desert, half-deserted landscape. Through his lens, we
see the uneasy truce between the elements and man-made encroachments;
two-pronged streetlamps are cacti on the road, the empty streets like so many
dry riverbeds. This is a town timeless in its stagnation, where one young man
waits by a pay phone every night for his girlfriend to call, where a
wrought-iron bench on the sidewalk constitutes a park, where everyone is
friends, enemies or lovers with everyone else — the characters do not so much
happen upon this place as move inexorably towards it. Call it Loneliness,
Israel.

Paired with Doron Ashkenazi’s costumes, the film becomes a series of tableaux,
eight uniformed men clad head-to-toe in the unblemished azure of a clear sky set
against a bleached palette of beige and brown, the canvas of dust, desert and
dereliction. The brilliant light blue uniforms lift right off the screen, even
when the men stand still, as they often are, waiting for Tawfiq's next
instruction.

Sasson Gabai plays Tawfiq as a tragic hero, worlds of sadness behind his bristle
moustache and watery eyes. Aristotle said a man doesn’t become a hero until he
can see the root of his own downfall; Tawfiq has seen the root of his downfall
for years, and when it is revealed at the nadir of the film, the camera holds on
Gabai, and we feel the man’s barricades collapsing one by one. Ronit Elkabetz
(you may remember her from the 2001 Israeli dramedy *Late Marriage*) is at her
pulchritudinous best playing Dina, a woman hurt, a woman all the more desperate
for human connection and happiness the farther they slip into the distance. She
lives, day in, day out, in this spit-stop of a town and she needs the band, and
Tawfiq, as much as he, and the band, need her. If Betty Grable was America’s
bombshell during World War II — blonde, bold, beautiful — then Ronit Elkabetz is
the pin-up girl of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict — dark, complicated,
cryptic.

Saleh Bakri shows less range as Haled, but demonstrates his keen comic timing in
a touching, and touch-heavy, seduction scene halfway through the film. His
brash, boyish good looks should lead him to leading man parts in short order.
Khalifa Natour, a fine actor, is given little to work with here except a
character sketch — “unhappy musician” (and isn’t that redundant?) — so his
scenes lack the emotional punch of the rest of the movie.

Longing requires absence, and Kolirin knows how to wield wordlessness; minutes
pass without dialogue as characters grapple with their individual demons. In
these scenes, Arik Leibovitch’s editing does the heavy lifting, whether
assembling a series of point-of-view shots to externalize a character’s thoughts
or, conversely, staying with a shot of the actor beyond the first impulse to cut
away. Kolirin is aware of the versatility and universality of body language; a
kiss is a kiss no matter how hopelessly lost you are in a foreign country; a
late-night glass of wine with a beautiful woman is an invitation in Egypt,
Israel, and around the world.

As *The Band’s Visit* approaches its denouement, when in Hollywood films the boy
gets the girl, the villain dies, the hero finds the treasure, and plotlines
neatly dovetail into a bowtie, it becomes clear that Kolirin is not susceptible
to tidy solutions or romance. You may even wonder, for a moment, why you
bothered to watch the film at all, why Kolirin bothered to make it. Where’s the
arc? The progress? The point? And then the lights come on, and with an
exhilarting rush you are grateful to be around people, to be lifted from the
public solitude of the darkened theatre, to not be lonely anymore, at 24 frames
per second.
