---
title: Ghett Out
date: 2010-09-05 00:00 UTC

hero_image_description: "A revolver"
publication: The Jamaica Gleaner
publication_date: 2010-09-05 00:00 UTC
publication_url: http://old.jamaica-gleaner.com/gleaner/20100905/ent/ent9.html

director: B L Allen
venue: Green Gables Theatre
writer: Michael Denton
---

Unless you live in a large uptown cave (you know, the kind that defaces a
hillside to park a Mercedes), then you've heard of Shebada—the slim-built,
hair-dyed dynamo of roots theatre. No? Here's your primer.

Roots theatre, the long-suffering bastard child of West African storytelling and
English farce, has finally come of age. And its adulthood is being ushered by
one company. Over the last few years, Stages Productions has used administrative
and marketing savvy to turn their handful of contract players into highly
profitable household names. Shebada and his peers work six nights a week and
twice on Sundays, playing to full houses at Green Gables Theatre, as well as
auditoriums, hotels and schools around the island, all at $1200 a head.

Given such compelling math, the literature doesn't get much attention. Stages
plays are, at worst, thematically disjointed, sexually gratuitous, visually
monotonous and overlong—symptoms of poor writing and direction. But in _Ghett
Out_, Shebada's latest romp, the peculiar alchemy of script and improvisation,
of audience and performer, and of comedy and commentary is one step closer to
gold.

Written by Michael Denton, directed by B L Allen, _Ghett Out_ takes place in a
bullet-prone ghetto lane (you know, the kind that you'd be afraid to park a
Mercedes), home to three tenants—illegal vendors Shebada and Barbara (Maylynne
Lowe), and fallen Maude (Abigail Grant), who used to have a house, a car and a
husband. Her plight provides just enough story for us to enjoy the extended
comic routines.

And what joy it is (if you can sit for three hours on a metal chair). The Stages
brand of theatre, at best, echoes vaudeville of a century ago, with its flat
sets, broad types, dirty jokes and open invitation for audience participation.
Luke Ellington and Maxwell Grant play policemen Macka and Run Tings, handling
hijinks and managing malapropisms with true bumbling perfection. Ellington is
the Abbott to Grant's Costello, and like any comic duo they are at their best
when misunderstanding one another.

The rest of the _Ghett Out_ cast is serviceable—Abigail Grant, Junior Williams
and Orville Hall stand up without standing out. Maylynne Lowe is the latest
high-profile crossover from the New Kingston theatre circuit, no doubt drawn by
the fat paycheck. Hers is the misfortune of being Powell in the age of Bolt;
there's room for only one lithe, histrionic diva on the Stages stage.

So we arrive where we started—Shebada.

If most of the company's success can be attributed to business acumen, the
remainder must go to the talent of their stars, especially one Keith Ramsey. Pop
sociologist Malcolm Gladwell (incidentally, Jamaican-born) says the difference
between mediocrity and genius in any field is 10,000 hours of practice. As
Shebada, Ramsey is racking up the hours, and all that practice has made him very
funny.

One of the hardest skills for an actor to master is the spontaneous reaction;
Ramsey does it effortlessly, creating on-the-fly responses to heckling patrons
while keeping one ear in the scene. Though young, his experience as a comedian
shows in his intuitive knowledge of what the audience sees. The night the
Gleaner attended _Ghett Out_, a patron made fun of Ramsey's get-up as he crossed
the stage. Ramsey paused, without looking at either his clothes or the heckler.
He simply stood there, to the roaring delight of the crowd, and then resumed his
movement. Whatever Stages is paying him, they should double it.

The true genius of _Ghett Out_, and by extension the entire Stages enterprise,
however, is the way it taps into our collective psyche. Sure, a philandering
husband is comedy, but in a country with so many single mothers, it's also a
tragedy. Sure, a trigger-happy officer is funny, but in a time when our real
policemen kill in cold blood, it's also cathartic. We don't just _want_ to
laugh; we need to laugh. In this way, Stages is almost providing a public
service, a sort of ritual confessional where we can purge our sins and then take
a route taxi home.

The play's title draws from our de facto national motto, put simply by Run
Tings—take what you can, and get out. Roots theatre is more profitable than
ever; by some back-of-the-envelope math, Stages pulls in a cool $1,000,000 each
week. As the audience got out of _Ghett Out_, turning into citizens once more,
they had to pass the black Mercedes parked by the door. Here's hoping Stages
helps us climb our mountain, instead of defacing yet another hillside.
