---
title: Love Games
date: 2008-09-25 00:00 UTC
published: false

hero_image_description: "A raggedy teddy bear"

director: Patrick Brown & Trevor Nairne
venue: Centerstage, now playing
writer: Patrick Brown
---

When Shakespeare turned the world into his stage, he laid out seven ages, the
third being “the lover, sighing like furnace, with a woeful ballad made to his
mistress’ eyebrow”. Patrick Brown, the playwright behind comedy-of-errors _Love
Games_, has his own, more malevolent, view — his lovers do not sigh; they slip
in and out of shadows and bedsheets, and they have not just mistresses, but
wives. Everyone is a control freak, but no one is in control. Let the games
begin.

The cast of five (Glen Campbell, Camille Davis, Lakeisha Ellison, Noelle Kerr,
and Chris Hutchinson) assumes multiple roles in a series of six independent (and
uneven) vignettes about infidelity. The play is rescued from mediocrity by
Campbell’s inordinate talent (more on him later) and Brown’s use of humor as
medicine for Jamaica’s social ills.

The vignettes are laced with vitriol and violence (the men are usually armed and
quick to anger) skillfully undercut by wit and wordplay (Prostitute: “Are you
married?” Businessman: “Happily”.) And the overbearing, overconfident men end up
diminished by the equally manipulative women — in one skit, a verbally abusive
husband kept from sleep by his moping wife finds his affair exposed and loses
both women at the same time. Still, Brown’s responsibility as a member of the
cultural cognoscenti demands that he look further askance at the endemic
misogyny in Jamaican life — comeuppance is not equivalent to condemnation.

The most put-upon characters tend to be Glen Campbell’s middle-class
incarnations. Few in contemporary theater have his assemblage of expression,
comic timing and physical awareness. There’s something of an old-fashioned
vaudeville master in the way his face registers new information, and his ability
to mine an extra laugh from the audience by freezing his reaction. Ordinary
dialogue comes alive from his mouth, as he punctuates his lines with whip-sharp
swings between baritone braggadocio and fearful falsetto. The natural on-stage
chemistry between himself and Camille Davis (an actress clearly committed to her
craft) provide many enjoyable moments. The other performers lack the connection
with their peers that underpins stage acting, and as such were unable to draw
more than the occasional chuckle from the full house at Centerstage.

The production values are adequate, although the set could have benefitted from
better use of levels and more varied placement of exits and entrances. Natural
projection and standard bright comedy lighting suffice for the size and scope of
the production.

Brown and Co. miss an opportunity to stitch the segments together by having one
infidelity trip over into the next, the web of trysts and deception growing
until it entangled all the players, climaxing in an orgy of revelation. The
actual ending, while unexpected, is a cheaper satisfaction. And the uneven
performances reflect poorly on the co-directors, Brown and Trevor Nairne. But if
we are all players on the world’s stage, _Love Games_ makes for a lovely game,
indeed.
