---
title: Me and Mi Chapsie
date: 2009-11-08 00:00 UTC

hero_image_description: "A woman rests her hand on the naked torso of a man"
publication: The Jamaica Gleaner
publication_date: 2009-11-08 00:00 UTC
publication_url: http://old.jamaica-gleaner.com

director: Michael Nicholson
venue: Pantry Playhouse, now playing
writer: Aston Cooke
---

Call it the Theory of the Performing Society.

Where there is an unexplained phenomenon, a theory is born. And our country begs
for explanation. Geographically, we're a dot, so small on most world maps that
we could be mistaken for a gravy stain. Our capital city, home to more than a
third of our people, is a dot within a dot.

Ethnographically, we are the Colosseum. Since independence some half-century
ago, we have been manufacturing cultural luminaries—people with an international
footprint, like Louise Bennett, Sonny Bradshaw, Trevor Rhone and Peter Tosh. In
the era of Usain Bolt, that footprint has only gotten larger. How can a small,
relatively young island nation have such a big impact on the world stage?

Thinking of the world as a stage is a good place to start. In Aston Cooke's
world, to be Jamaican is to be a performer. His new play, *Me and Mi Chapsie*,
is a humourous treatise on that idea.

The chapsie is Donald (Everaldo Creary), a deejay in a popular inner city
dancehall. Popular, that is, amongst the blue-collar, red-haired crowd. The
woman he belongs to, divorced ad executive Ms Marilyn Simpson, lives many stone
throws away in Norbrook, where they don't really throw stones at all. They meet
when Marilyn gets invited by her co-worker to a party in downtown Kingston.

Despite the odds and the odd looks, they like each other. They just don't know
how to show it without incurring suspicion and derision. She uses her money, and
he uses his... well, more private assets. Marilyn, past her prime, worries he
sees her as a chequebook, and Donald wants to be more than an appendage.

Within this context, Cooke, along with director Michael Nicholson, exposes
Jamaican identities as the prepackaged behaviours that they are. In the first
scene, Marilyn's domestic help, Cheryl (Carlene Taylor), shows her the walk,
talk and attitude she needs to fit in downtown. Because it is an act, it can be
taught. Keeping up appearances figures large in other scenes. Marilyn is
chastised by her co-worker, Janice (Marsha Campbell) about her new
relationship—because to Janice, it doesn't look right. Marilyn and Donald fight
over his clothes, now that his social position—his role—has changed. “The
important thing,” she says, “is to act the part, and look the part, and everyone
will believe you.”

Last Sunday, when *The Gleaner* attended, an unplanned power outage vindicated
Cooke’s viewpoint. Thrown into darkness, leads Harris and Creary paused, then
left the stage, waiting for the real world to retreat once more. But a young man
from the audience stepped to the front, where, dimly lit by a dozen cell phones,
he entertained the rest of us with impromptu dance and rhyme. He was rewarded
with appreciative applause. That's what happens in a Performing Society.

Theatre can be a most unforgiving art, because it relies heavily on the
physicality of its imperfect practitioners. And when sex is in the script, as in
*Me and Mi Chapsie*, even more so. Dahlia Harris has some of her curves in the
wrong places to be a cougar, and Everaldo Creary, though muscular, is a bit too
small to ooze testosterone. But what these two actors lack in looks, they
account for with talent and chemistry. They pepper their onstage affair with the
kind of believable affection and bodily comfort that only comes from hard work
and mutual trust. That's rare, and they deserve kudos for it.

Taylor and Campbell are also convincing, although their characters have less to
do. However, that doesn't stop Danar Royal, as Donald's best friend, Sean, from
stealing most of the scenes he's in, with his improbably slender frame,
expressive eyes, and of-the-moment dance moves. The party of five work well
together—Creary and Royal are twice as effective when sharing the stage.

Technical aspects were less impressive, with a set that did not adequately
differentiate a nightspot from an ad agency. Light and sound design were
lacking—much more could have been done to create the visual and aural
environment of the dancehall, which felt empty and limp. In a cramped theatre
like the Pantry Playhouse, Nicholson should make patrons imagine—through the
magic of the stage—what time, money and space cannot provide.

But it's really not for a lone theatre critic to say, is it? The beautiful
upside to living in Kingston is that only the strong, the determined and the
gifted survive. If Aston Cooke plays his part well, long after the rest of the
world forgets, applause will ring out from the dot in the dot on the map. That's
what happens in a Performing Society.

*Me and Mi Chapsie* runs Wednesdays to Sundays.
