---
title: Tick Tock
date: 2010-05-05 00:00 UTC

hero_image_description: "A wall clock reading a few minutes to midnight"
publication: The Jamaica Gleaner
publication_date: 2010-05-05 00:00 UTC
publication_url: http://old.jamaica-gleaner.com/gleaner/20100505/ent/ent3.html

director: Owen Ellis
venue: The Theatre Place
writer: Owen Ellis
---

The dramatic arts haven't been this exciting in 25 years.

The Independence generation—Charles Hyatt, Louise Bennett, Trevor Rhone—had
history on their side. Fate gave them their mandate—the country was new, and we
needed an identity. They told us who we were. But by the mid-1980s, what was new
had grown old. The generation they inspired—Cathi Levy, Oliver Samuels, Owen
Ellis—had their own ideas. The country had changed.

This clash of ideas was the best thing to happen to our art since the British
left. Cathi gathered her Little People. Oliver found himself _At Large_. Not to
be left behind, Trevor Rhone wrote _The Game_ and _Milk and Honey_.

Now another quarter-century has passed. Oliver's posse is passe. All that
remains of their artistic explosion are a few scattered ASHEs. New faces are
here—Amba Chevannes, Michael Holgate, Teniele Warren—with new ideas. The country
has changed again. Amba wrote _Dinner with Eleanor_. Michael's musical, _Glass
Routes_, just finished its run. Not to be left behind, Owen Ellis has written
and directed _Tick Tock_.

_Tick Tock_ is an experiment that eschews character and narrative. Instead, an
ensemble of twelve (hours on a clock?) plays different Jamaican archetypes while
reciting long-form poetry. Set in the ruins of downtown Kingston, in a nameless,
placeless ghetto, the performers give voice to our most dispossessed fellow
citizens. The poetry examines the forces at work in their lives—the intimacy of
poverty, the violence of despair.

This newspaper trumpets the nation's murder tally on its front pages without
emotion or explanation. Ellis tries to provide both, putting faces on both the
killer and the killed. In one sketch, a street domino game turns ugly when a
player snubs the local don. The don responds by dragging the man into an alley
and executing him, ensuring the respect and allegiance of everyone else.

Ellis captures the tense community of the inner-city, where your best friend,
your ex-boyfriend, your mother and your rival are all within a _rock-stone_ʼs
throw. Arguments flare and subside—another sketch has two women fighting over
the resident casanova—but life goes on, as it must.

In these and other moments, Ellis engages, but _Tick Tock_ stops short of
success. While the show is interesting to listen to, it is boring to look at.
The set consists of four battered two-storey facades, but they are positioned
shoulder-to-shoulder in a line. The performance loses one of its three
dimensions for movement, because the stage has no depth. The facades seem
hastily painted and graffitied, without an artist's eye for evocative details.
And Ellis doesn't explore spatial possibilities—much more could have been done
with the upstairs windows he built.

But we must distinguish between the experiment and the social scientist. _Tick
Tock_ is a mixed bag (with a second half that needs reworking), sometimes
compelling, sometimes not. If you are a patron of the arts, go see it. If you
want the best use of two hours and two Nannies, go see something else. Owen
Ellis, however, is a great investment. As the younger generation of artists
takes over, expect more parting shots from this valuable veteran. Remember,
things won't be this exciting for another 25 years.
