---
title: Yes!
date: 2008-09-29 00:00 UTC
published: false

hero_image_description: "A pair of hands clasped as if in prayer"

director: Gregory Thames
venue: National Arena, September 26-28
writer: Fr Richard Ho Lung
---

The life of Rev Fr Richard Ho Lung — rebel cum priest cum rebel priest — is a
story waiting to be told. It already has — in the autobiographical _Diary of a
Ghetto Priest_, published in book form and a long-running column in the Jamaica
Gleaner, where the founder and Superior General of the Missionaries of the Poor
parses both his life and ours with his deep Christian faith and empathy for
those in need in Jamaica. The urban-clergyman-provides-social-uplift kernel of
his journey has many fictional (e.g., the 2001 American film _Diary of a City
Priest_) and non-fictional precedents; Martin Luther King Jr’s early career
followed a similar trajectory. All of which is to say that few excuses can be
found for the incoherent, overreaching, dramatically bereft production on
display last weekend at the Arena, _Yes!_, which fictionalizes his life.

Nevertheless, I will try to find one.

The director of a Ho Lung production usually faces a decidedly unusual task:
transforming some half-dozen musical numbers into a narrative that will hold an
audience for two hours (full disclosure: I performed with Fr Ho Lung’s theatre
troupe for most of the 1990s). Other songs are added; dialogue written;
choreography introduced, all with the aim of creating and enhancing a good
story.

In years gone by, this fell on the shoulders of the incomparable Alwyn Bully, a
Dominican director who adopted Jamaica, adapted Ho Lung, and spearheaded a
string of hit shows (from _Sugar Cain_ and _The Rock_ to _Jesus 2000_ and
_Moses_). By contrast, _Yes!_ is directed by Gregory Thames, a longstanding
member of the production team who steps into Alwyn’s long shadow but does not
find his footing.

The play moves like an old car: too slowly, with the occasional jerk forward.
Early scenes establish Father Luke (the protagonist, played adequately by
perennial favourite Wynton Williams) as a man of the people, but he spends few
moments amongst them. Adversaries appear and disappear without resistance or
explanation — an irate Member of Parliament added tedium, not tension. Indulgent
lighting, effects and costumes did not mask these (and other) structural flaws.

At times, _Yes!_ approaches drama. Luke searches for a middle ground between the
rigidly hierarchical church and the rigidly hierarchical ghetto; he confronts
archbishops and dons with equal aplomb, and the parallels are perhaps unintended
but striking. He also struggles with externalized internal demons who create
authentic menace on stage.

A foreign reporter figure (Maylynne Walton, unconvincing) allows Thames to bring
a videocamera on stage and film “live footage” of the inner city, projected on
dual screens built into the set. The effect is twofold: newsfeed (and by
extension all journalism) is stripped to its naked class bias, and we are given
a second, warmer window into Jamaica’s forgotten families.

Standout performances include Chevaughn Clayton as a conflicted gunman and
Michael Harris as Father Luke’s right-hand man. They uncover humanity in their
characters and sing with conviction (Note to Thames: the National Arena has
notoriously poor acoustics; staging a musical inside it makes for frustrating
listening). The show would have benefitted from a smaller space (say, The Little
Theater) and a longer run. Then, on the third weekend, after the curtain fell, a
critic could have leaned back, whipped out his notebook, and scribbled: Yes!
