---
title: Crazy for you — Like good wine, Last Call seduces and satisfies
date: 2011-08-03 00:00 UTC
tags: Last Call, review

author: Tyrone Reid
source: Tallawah
source_url: http://www.tallawahmagazine.com/2011/08/crazy-for-you-like-good-wine-last-call.html
---

Although “love is not my thing,” is the constant refrain of one of the main
characters in Last Call, there’s hardly a more rigorously explored concept in
the new musical than the healing power of love. Love, lost and found would be
an apt subtitle for the production, which opened at the Philip Sherlock Centre
last week. The professional debut offering of writer-codirector Keiran King,
it’s a nostalgic and frequently sublime piece of work steeped in vintage
storytelling, yearning, heartache and serendipity. And while a strain of
melancholy hovers over the dimly lit stage, the evocative music (supplied by a
live band) and the solid performances restore and sustain much of the joy to be
had.

It’s pre-Independent Jamaica (the 50s are approaching) and remnants of
colonization are still palpable. The very happening Myrtle Bank Hotel provides
a tony setting, where four friends, hailing from eclectic backgrounds, are set
to reunite a decade since they last saw each other face to face. Cecil (Maurice
Bryan), the sharply dressed Duke Street banker, and Rose (Rishille Bellamy),
the sweet air stewardess, are the first to arrive, keeping company in the
hotel’s bar and dining lounge with Clarence (Andrew Lawrence), their server.

We then meet telephone man Joseph (Shayne Powell), best described as a lovesick
pup nursing an abiding devotion for Daphne (Sakina Deer), the brash and
world-weary diva/lounge singer, who is the last to arrive, naturally. It
wouldn’t be a stretch to say that the circumstances of the group’s reunion are
rather unforeseen, especially for the eternally idealistic Rose and Cecil.

With its moody art-house ambience, hints of romance and drama, and
retrospective salute to the heyday of original class and glamour, Last Call is
essentially a play of shattered dreams and thwarted hopes, but an irrepressible
spirit of optimism courses throughout. Taking his cues from the old masters,
King goes after refined sophistication with his script. And while the dialogue
isn’t always enlightening, the writer’s eye for human fallibility and obvious
passion for the period consistently shine through. As directors, King and
Michael Daley guide the proceedings with deftness.

Members of the cast have never been better. Bellamy is delightful, playing Rose
with warmth and a luminous gaze. Bryan’s acting and singing are impressive,
particularly on the solo number “Not for Me”. Lawrence draws on his trademark
booming baritone and convinces as Clarence. As for Powell, he cements his
star-on-the-rise reputation with a terrific portrayal and shares a buoyant
chemistry with Deer, who gives her finest performance.

While the show is not entirely without fault, the painstaking attention to
detail that clearly went into the production largely reaps rich dividends, as
the major elements – lighting, wardrobe, set design, movement and the musical
score – make sterling contributions. Musically, the numbers “Life is more than
Romance” and the title track are memorable.

Beautifully told and well performed (the singing voices are on point), Last
Call rightfully earns praise and deserves attention. Audiences will fall for
the authentic feel and wildly vintage appeal.
