---
title: Last Call a refreshing musical
date: 2011-08-14 00:00 UTC
tags: Last Call, review

author: Richard Johnson
source: The Jamaica Observer
source_url: http://www.jamaicaobserver.com/entertainment/Last-Call-a-refreshing-musical_9444139
---

JAMAICA is replete with stories — everyday tales which, if put in the hands of
that special scriptwriter can make it on to the stages and screens of the world.

There is word that Kingston's Myrtle Bank Hotel, the famed local establishment
along the waterfront which is said to have hosted movie stars, musicians,
diplomats and anyone who wanted to be someone, is to be rebuilt.

With the hotel's rich tradition, why not use it as the backdrop for a musical,
set in 1949? That must have been what ran through the mind of writer/director
Keiran King as he conceptualised Last Call, now playing at the UWI's Philip
Sherlock Centre.

The plot follows four high school friends who reunite by design and coincidence
at the famous Kingston hotel. What follows is a tale of love — looking for it,
lost it, don't believe in it, need it — all set to great music and a good
family entertainment.

From the moment the lights dim in the theatre, it is clear that attention has
been paid to detail as the live seven-piece orchestra led by Karen Armstrong
strikes up with the overture.

When the curtains open that attention to detail is even more stark with the
well-appointed set, dressed in brown tones. Ranging from dark chocolate to
shades of beige, this gives the production a 'sepiad' look harking back to 1949.

These tones are continued in the costuming, which follows the similar brown
tones again to great effect.

The cast features Maurice Bryan who plays Cecil, the showy banker who insists
that love is not his thing and Andrew Lawrence as the wise seen-it-all, old
bartender Clarence. Love-lorn BOAC flight attendant Rose is played by Rishille
Bellamy; 'disappointed puppy' Joe, played by Shayne Powell, and seductive
chanteuse Dee Dee whose character comes to life courtesy of Sakina Deer.

Last Call is truly a feel-good piece whose script doesn't take you to the edge
of your seat eating your nails with suspense, but it definitely entertains with
a steady pace, great use of space, clever lines and of course the music.

Writer/director King cleverly weaves some old standards of the period with
original music, and this is used to great effect throughout the piece to tell
the story and move the plot along. The merger of My Funny Valentine and Just
One of Those Things is a case in point, as the two songs, sung simultaneously,
bring across the divergent points being expressed by characters Joe and Dee Dee.

With the exception of Lawrence, who is well-known for his commanding tenor
voice, the other members of the cast make a good unit musically. Bellamy, the
daughter of renowned music teacher Paulette Bellamy, shows her range and merges
acting and singing to great effect; her facial expressions are at time
priceless. The surprise for many is the voice that inhabits the svelte frame of
Sakina Deer. Not known for her singing, she delights the audiences as the
lounge chanteuse at the Myrtle Bank. Her matter-of-fact tone makes the sarcasm
of the character come together. Shayne Powell is perfectly cast. His soft,
light voice is on point for the naiveté of the character. Bryan, the pompous
banker is another well-suited fit for the role demonstrating what many deem
'short man' syndrome in the way he flashes his material gains -- money, car,
suit, job.

Last Call offers that refreshing change on the local theatre scene, which is
dominated by comedies and 'roots' theatre. This production is neither, although
these are comedic moments which add to the overall enjoyment of the piece.

The cast and crew of Last Call can take a well-deserved bow for this one. Bravo!
